#Introduction
The TIDY_DATA repository holds the code 'run.analysis.R' to clean, merge and summarize the data available in the Samsung datasets, and the codebook explaining the variables in dataset outputted by the code.

Information for data generated by the script can be found in the Codebook.md


#Input Data Description

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 

For each record it is provided:
======================================

- Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration.
- Triaxial Angular velocity from the gyroscope. 
- A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables. 
- Its activity label. 
- An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.

The dataset includes the following files:
=========================================

- 'README.txt'

- 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.

- 'features.txt': List of all features.

- 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.

- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.

- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.

- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.

- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.

The following files are available for the train and test data. Their descriptions are equivalent. 

- 'train/subject_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 

- 'train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_train.txt': The acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer X axis in standard gravity units 'g'. Every row shows a 128 element vector. The same description applies for the 'total_acc_x_train.txt' and 'total_acc_z_train.txt' files for the Y and Z axis. 

- 'train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_train.txt': The body acceleration signal obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. 

- 'train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_train.txt': The angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope for each window sample. The units are radians/second. 


#Input and analysis Assumptions

1.run_analysis.R has to be run in from within the folder of the dataset. 
2.Only the mean and standard deviation for the measurements on the data have been extracted. The MeanFreaq() of the measurements has not been extracted by the code

#Analysis Procedure

1. The code constructs file paths to the datasets within the training and testing folders.
2. The features.txt, activity_labels.txt, subject_train.txt, subject_test.txt, X_test.txt, Y_test.txt, X_train.txt, Y_train.txt are all read in as variables
3. The indices of the required mean() and standard deviation() variables are computed 
4. These indices are used to extract the required data from X_test and X_train datasets.  
5. The subject_test , Y_test are both attached to the selected data from the X_test set. The same is done for the 'train' sets.
6. The train and test datasets are then merged together.
7. The variables are named using their appropriate variable names using indices to pick the right variable names from features
8. Activity labels are provided by matching the number in the second column labelled 'Activity' to the activities in the activity_label.txt data.
9. Data is categorized into groups of each subject and each activity they performed. The mean of every variable is taken for every group 
10. The output data comprised of a datasets of the mean of every variable for all activities provided by a individual subject. 